## FEDERATED LEARNING BASED ON DYNAMIC REGULARIZATION

Durmus Alp Emre Acar ∗ alpacar@bu.edu

Yue Zhao †

yue.zhao@arm.com

Ramon Matas Navarro †

ramon.matas@arm.com

Matthew Mattina †

matthew.mattina@arm.com

Paul N. Whatmough †

paul.whatmough@arm.com

Venkatesh Saligrama ∗

srv@bu.edu

## ABSTRACT

We propose a novel federated learning method for distributively training neural network models, where the server orchestrates cooperation between a subset of randomly chosen devices in each round. We view Federated Learning problem primarily from a communication perspective and allow more device level computations to save transmission costs. We point out a fundamental dilemma, in that the minima of the local-device level empirical loss are inconsistent with those of the global empirical loss. Different from recent prior works, that either attempt inexact minimization or utilize devices for parallelizing gradient computation, we propose a dynamic regularizer for each device at each round, so that in the limit the global and device solutions are aligned. We demonstrate both through empirical results on real and synthetic data as well as analytical results that our scheme leads to efficient training, in both convex and non-convex settings, while being fully agnostic to device heterogeneity and robust to large number of devices, partial participation and unbalanced data.

## 1 INTRODUCTION

In McMahan et al. (2017), the authors proposed federated learning (FL), a concept that leverages data spread across many devices, to learn classification tasks distributively without recourse to data sharing. The authors identified four principle characteristics of FL based on several use cases. First, the communication links between the server and devices are unreliable, and at any time, there may only be a small subset of devices that are active. Second, data is massively distributed , namely the number of devices are large, while amount of data per device is small. Third, device data is heterogeneous , in that data in different devices are sampled from different parts of the sample space. Finally, data is unbalanced , in that the amount of data per device is highly variable.

The basic FL problem can be cast as one of empirical minimization of a global loss objective, which is decomposable as a sum of device-level empirical loss objectives. The number of communication rounds, along with the amount of bits communicated per round, has emerged as a fundamental gold standard for FL problems. Many mobile and IoT devices are bandwidth constrained, and wireless transmission and reception is significantly more power hungry than computation (Halgamuge et al., 2009). As such schemes that reduce communication are warranted. While distributed SGD is a viable method in this context, it is nevertheless communication inefficient.

A Fundamental Dilemma. Motivated by these ideas, recent work has proposed to push optimization burden onto the devices, in order to minimize amount of communications. Much of the work in this context, propose to optimize the local risk objective based on running SGD over mini-batched device data, analogous to what one would do in a centralized scenario. On the one hand, training models on local data that minimize local empirical loss appears to be meaningful, but yet, doing so, these different settings. The amount of most occurred class labels that consume 40% , 60% and 80% of device data are shown in the histogram plots. For example, every class label is equally represented in IID setting hence 4 , 6 and 8 classes occupy 40% , 60% , and 80% of the local datapoints for each device. If we consider non-IID settings, we see 80% of local data belongs to mostly 4 or 5 different classes for Dirichlet . 6 ; and 3 or 4 different classes for Dirichlet . 3 settings.

∗ Boston University, Boston, MA

† Arm ML Research Lab, Boston, MA

To generate unbalanced data, we sample datapoint amounts from a lognormal distribution. Controlling the variance of lognormal distribution gives unbalanced data per devices. For instance, in CIFAR-10, balanced and unbalanced data settings have standard deviation of data amounts among devices as 0 and 0 . 3 respectively.

LEAF (Caldas et al., 2018) is used to generate the Shakespeare dataset used in this work. The LEAF framework allows to generate IID as well as non-IID federated settings. The non-IID dataset is the natural split of Shakespeare where each device corresponds to a role and the local dataset contains this role's sentences. The IID dataset is generated by combining the sentences from all roles and randomly dividing them into devices. In this work, we consider 100 devices and restrict number of datapoints per device to 2000 .

Models. We use fully connected neural network architectures for MNIST and EMNIST-L. Both models take input images as a vector of 784 dimensions followed by 2 hidden layers and a final softmax layer. The number of neurons in the hidden layers are 200 and 100 for MNIST and EMNISTL respectively. These models achieve 98 . 4% and 95 . 0% test accuracy in MNIST and EMNIST-L if trained on datapoints from all devices. The model considered for MNIST is the same model used in original FedAvg work (McMahan et al., 2017).

For CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100, we use a CNN consisting of two convolutional layers with 64 5 × 5 filters, two 2 × 2 max pooling layers, two fully connected layers with 394 and 192 neurons, and finally a softmax layer. The models achieve 85 . 2% and 55 . 3% test accuracy in CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 respectively. Our CNN model is similar to the used for CIFAR-10 in the original FedAvg work (McMahan et al., 2017), except that we don't use Batch Normalization layers.

For the next character prediction task (Shakespeare), we use an LSTM. The model converts an 80 character long input sequence to a 80 × 8 sequence using an embedding. This sequence is fed to a two layer LSTM with hidden size of 100 units. The output of stacked LSTM is passed to a softmax layer. Overall, this architecture achieves a test accuracy of 50 . 8% and 51 . 2% in IID and non-IID settings, respectively, if trained on data from all devices. We report both IID and non-IID performance here because the datasets are randomly regenerated out of the whole Shakespeare writing hence train and test split is different for both cases. This Neural Network model is the same model used in the original FedProx study (Li et al., 2020a).

In passing, we note here that, we are not after state of the art model performances for these datasets, our aim is to compare the performances of these models in federated setting using FedDyn and other baselines.

Hyperparameters. We consider different hyperparameter configurations for different setups and datasets. For all the experiments, we fix batch size as 50 for MNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and EMNIST-L datasets and as 100 for Shakespeare dataset.

We note here that µ , α and K hyperparameters are used only in FedProx, FedDyn and SCAFFOLD respectively. K is the equivalent of epoch for SCAFFOLD algorithm and we searched K values to have the same amount of local computation as in other methods. For example, if each device has 500 datapoints, batch size is 50 and epoch is 10 , local devices apply 100 SGD steps which is equivalent to K being 100 .

MNIST. As for the 100 devices, balanced data, full participation setup, hyperparameters are searched for all algorithms in all IID and Dirichlet settings for a fixed 100 communication rounds. The search space consists of learning rates in [ . 1 , . 01] , epochs in [10 , 20 , 50] , K s in [120 , 240 , 600] , µ s in [1 , . 01 , . 0001] and α s in [ . 001 , . 01 , . 03 , . 1] . Weight decay of 10 -4 is applied to prevent overfitting and no learning rate decay across communications rounds is used. The selected configuration for FedAvg is . 1 learning rate and 20 epoch; for FedProx is . 1 learning rate and . 0001 µ ; for FedDyn is . 1 learning rate, 50 epoch and . 01 α ; and for SCAFFOLD is . 1 learning rate and 600 K for all IID and Dirichlet settings. These configurations are fixed and their performances are obtained for 500 communication rounds.

For the partial participation, 100 devices, balanced data setup, the selected configuration for FedAvg is . 1 learning rate and 10 epoch; for FedProx is . 1 learning rate and . 0001 µ ; for FedDyn is . 1 learning rate, 50 epoch and . 01 α ; and for SCAFFOLD is . 1 learning rate and 600 K for all IID and Dirichlet settings except that α is chosen to be . 03 for 10% IID setting. 0 . 998 learning rate decay per communication round is used and weight decay of 10 -4 is applied to prevent overfitting for all methods.

For the centralized model, we choose learning rate as . 1 , epoch as 150 and learning rate is halved in every 50 epochs.

EMNIST-L. We used similar hyperparameters as in MNIST dataset. The configuration for FedAvg is . 1 learning rate and 20 epoch; for FedProx is . 1 learning rate and 10 -4 µ ; for FedDyn is . 1 learning rate, 50 epoch and 0 . 005 α ; and for SCAFFOLD is . 1 learning rate and 500 K for all IID and Dirichlet full participation settings.

The selected configuration for FedAvg is . 1 learning rate and 10 epoch; for FedProx is . 1 learning rate and . 0001 µ ; for FedDyn is . 1 learning rate, 50 epoch; and for SCAFFOLD is . 1 learning rate and 500 K for all IID and Dirichlet partial settings. α is chosen to be . 003 for 10% and 1% IID; . 005 for 10% Dirichlet . 6 and 1% Dirichlet . 3 ; . 001 for 1% Dirichlet . 6 and . 01 for 10% Dirichlet . 3 settings. 0 . 998 learning rate decay per communication round is used and weight decay of 10 -4 is applied to prevent overfitting for all methods.

For the centralized model, we choose learning rate as . 1 , epoch as 150 and learning rate is halved in every 50 epochs.

CIFAR-10. The same hyperparameters are applied to all the CIFAR-10 experiments, including: 0 . 1 for learning rate, 5 for epochs, and 10 -3 for weight decay. The learning rate decay is selected from the range of [0 . 992 , 0 . 998 , 1 . 0] . The α value is selected from the range of [10 -3 , 10 -2 , 10 -1 ] for FedDyn. The µ s value is selected from the range of [10 -2 , 10 -3 , 10 -4 ] .

For the centralized model, we choose learning rate as . 1 , epoch as 500 and learning rate decay as . 992 .

CIFAR-100. The same hyperparameters are applied to the CIFAR-100 experiments with 100 devices. including: 0 . 1 for learning rate, 5 for epochs, and 10 -3 for weight decay. The learning rate decay is selected from the range of [0 . 992 , 0 . 998 , 1 . 0] . The α value is selected from the range of [10 -3 , 10 -2 , 10 -1 ] for FedDyn. The µ s value is selected from the range of [10 -2 , 10 -3 , 10 -4 ] .

As for 500 device, balanced data, 10% participation, IID setup, . 1 learning rate, . 0001 µ , 10 -3 weight decay applied. Epochs in [2 , 5] and corresponding K s in [4,10] searched. α s in [ . 1 , . 01 , . 001] are considered for FedDyn. Epoch of 2 is selected for FedDyn, FedAvg and FedProx, K of 4 is selected for SCAFFOLD. . 01 α value is selected for FedDyn. The same parameters are chosen for 500 device, balanced data, 10% participation, Dirichlet . 3 setup.

As for 100 device, unbalanced data, 10% participation, IID and Dirichlet . 3 settings, epoch of 2 is selected for FedDyn, FedAvg and FedProx, K of 20 is selected for SCAFFOLD. . 1 α value is applied for FedDyn. . 0001 µ is used in FedProx.

For the centralized model, we choose learning rate as . 1 , epoch as 500 and learning rate decay as . 992 .

Shakespeare. As for 100 devices, balanced data, full participation setup, the hyperparameters are searched with all combinations of learning rate in [1] , epochs in [1 , 5] , K s in [20 , 100] , µ s in [ . 01 , . 0001] and α s in [ . 001 , . 009 , . 01 , . 015] . Weight decay of 10 -4 is applied to prevent overfitting and no learning rate decay across communications rounds is used. The selected configuration for FedAvg is 1 learning rate and 5 epoch; for FedProx is 1 learning rate, 5 epoch and . 0001 µ ; for FedDyn is 1 learning rate, 5 epoch and . 009 α ; and for SCAFFOLD is 1 learning rate and 100 K in IID and non IID settings.

For the partial participation, 100 devices, balanced data setup, we choose 1 learning rate and 5 epoch for FedAvg; 1 learning rate, 5 epoch and . 0001 µ for FedProx; 1 learning rate and 100 K for SCAFFOLD; and 1 learning rate and 5 epoch for FedDyn in all cases. α is . 015 and . 001 for 10% and 1% settings respectively. No learning rate decay is applied for 10% settings and a decay of . 998 is applied for 1% settings. Weight decay of 10 -4 is applied to prevent overfitting.

For the centralized model, we choose learning rate as 1 , epoch as 150 and learning rate is halved in every 50 epochs.

Additionally, we performed gradient clipping to prevent overflow in weights for all methods. We found out that, this increases stability of algorithms.

Convergence Plots. We give convergence plots of experiments. The convergence plots of moderate and large number of devices in different device distributions are shown in Figure 4 and 5 for CIFAR10 and CIFAR-100 datasets. Similarly, convergence curves of different participation levels and distributions are plotted in Figure 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 for all datasets. Finally, Figure 12 and 13 show convergence plots for balanced data and unbalance data in different device distributions.

We emphasize that convergence curves show accuracy achieved with respect to rounds communicated. However, the metric we want to minimize, the amount of information transmitted, is not the same as number of communication rounds. For instance, SCAFFOLD transmits two models including state of devices per communication round. This difference is accounted in the tables.

We observed that averaging all device models gives more stable convergence curves hence we report the performance of the average model from all devices in each communication round. We note that we do not modify the algorithms, this part is only for reporting purposes.

Additional to experiments stated, we test our algorithm with a more complex model. We consider ResNet18 (He et al., 2016) structure on CIFAR-10 IID, 100 devices, balanced data, 10% participation setting. Batch normalization layers have inherent statistics which can be problematic in FL. Therefore, we use group normalization (Wu &amp; He, 2018) instead of Batch normalization in ResNet18. The convergence curves are shown in Figure 11. FedDyn still outperforms the baseline methods in a higher capacity model setup.

## A.3 α SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS OF FEDDYN

α is an important parameter of FedDyn. Indeed, it is the only hyperparameter of the algorithm when devices have access to an optimization solver. In theory, α balances two problem dependent constants as shown in Theorem 2, Theorem 3 and Theorem 4. Consequently, optimal value of α depends on these constants. Since these constants are independent of T , the value of α does not asymptotically affect convergence rate.

To test sensitivity, we consider CIFAR-10, IID, 100 devices, 10% participation setting. Figure 1a shows convergence plots for different α configurations while keeping all other parameters constant in FedDyn. Figure 1b presents the best achieved test accuracy with respect to different α values. We see that best test performance is obtained when α = 10 -1 . We note that all configurations converge, but some of them converges to a better stationary points. This aligns with the theory because we guarantee convergence to a stationary point.

Figure 1: CIFAR-10 α sensitivity analysis of FedDyn.

<!-- image -->

## A.4 COMPARISON TO A FULL PARTICIPATION METHOD

Recently, FedSplit (Pathak &amp; Wainwright, 2020) is introduced to target non IID data distributions among devices. The work simplifies FL setting by considering full device participation. It charac- terizes FedAvg convergence and shows that FedAvg should do only one step update per device in each round to achieve global minima if device losses are different. In such cases, FedAvg becomes decentralized SGD. After pointing out this inconsistency, FedSplit is given as a potential solution.

In this work, we aim to solve FL problem with four principle characteristic which are partial participation due to unreliable communication links, massive number of devices, heterogeneous device data and unbalanced data amounts per device. Partial participation is a critical property, because, it is inconceivable that we will not be in a situation where we have all devices participating in each round. However, FedSplit does not support partial participation.

Nevertheless, we adapt FedSplit to partial participation setting with the following changes. If a device is not active in the current round, its model z t +1 k = z t k and its intermediate state z t + 1 2 k = z t -1+ 1 2 k are frozen. For the server model, we have two options. First option is to keep the server model as average of all device models, x t = 1 m ∑ k ∈ m z t k , which is named as FedSplit All. Second option is to have the server model as the average of only current round's active devices x t = 1 |P t | ∑ k ∈P t z t k , which is named as FedSplit Act. In passing, we do not claim that these modifications are optimal.

For empirical evaluation, we consider CIFAR-10, 100 devices, 100% and 10% participation settings. Figure 2a and 2b show comparison between FedSplit and FedDyn for 100% and 10% participation levels respectively. FedSplit All and FedSplit Act are the same in full participation setting hence shown as one method. We observe that FedDyn performs better than FedSplit in both cases. We see that FedSplit All where the server model averages all device models is significantly underperforming than FedSplit Act where the server only averages active devices. This is due to the fact that the server model is too slow to change when all devices are averaged because most of the devices are the same across consecutive rounds. We further note that it might not be easy to get convergence theory of FedSplit in the partial participation setting.

⊔˜̂⋃√⌈]√(̂√



Figure 2: CIFAR-10 - FedSplit and FedDyn comparison in full and 10% participation settings.

<!-- image -->

## A.5 FIGURES OMITTED IN THE MAIN TEXT

Table 3: Datasets

| Dataset     |   Train Samples Amount |   Test Samples Amount |
|-------------|------------------------|-----------------------|
| CIFAR-10    |                  50000 |                 10000 |
| CIFAR-100   |                  50000 |                 10000 |
| MNIST       |                  60000 |                 10000 |
| EMNIST-L    |                  48000 |                  8000 |
| Shakespeare |                 200000 |                 40000 |

Table 4: Number of parameters transmitted relative to one round of FedAvg to reach target test accuracy for balanced data and unbalanced data in IID and Dirichlet . 3 settings with 10% participation. SCAFFOLD communicates the current model and its associated gradient per round, while others communicate only the current model. As such number of rounds for SCAFFOLD is one half of those reported.

| Local Data   | Dataset        | Accuracy       | FedDyn         | SCAFFOLD                 | FedAvg                         | FedProx                               |
|--------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|--------------------------|--------------------------------|---------------------------------------|
|              | IID            | IID            | IID            | IID                      | IID                            | IID                                   |
|              | CIFAR-10       | 84.5 82.3      | 637 240        | 1852(2.9 × ) 512(2.1 × ) | 1000 + ( > 1.6 × ) 994(4.1 × ) | 1000 + ( > 1.6 × ) 825(3.4 × )        |
| Balanced     | CIFAR-100      | 51.0 40.9      | 522 159        | 1854(3.6 × ) 286(1.8 × ) | 1000 + ( > 1.9 × ) 822(5.2 × ) | 1000 + ( > 1.9 × ) 873(5.5 × )        |
|              | Dirichlet (.3) | Dirichlet (.3) | Dirichlet (.3) | Dirichlet (.3)           | Dirichlet (.3)                 | Dirichlet (.3)                        |
|              | CIFAR-10       | 82.5 80.7      | 444 232        | 1880(4.2 × ) 594(2.6 × ) | 1000 + ( > 2.3 × ) 863(3.7 × ) | 1000 + ( > 2.3 × ) 930(4.0 × )        |
|              | CIFAR-100      | 51.0 42.3      | 561 170        | 1884(3.4 × ) 330(1.9 × ) | 1000 + ( > 1.8 × ) 959(5.6 × ) | 1000 + ( > 1.8 × ) 882(5.2 × )        |
|              | IID            | IID            | IID            | IID                      | IID                            | IID                                   |
|              | CIFAR-10       | 84.0 82.3      | 335 213        | 1152(3.4 × ) 548(2.6 × ) | 1000 + ( > 3.0 × ) 834(3.9 × ) | 1000 + ( > 3.0 × ) 834(3.9 × )        |
| Unbalanced   | CIFAR-100      | 53.0 48.2      | 386 209        | 1656(4.3 × ) 800(3.8 × ) | 1000 + ( > 2.6 × ) 968(4.6 × ) | 1000 + ( > 2.6 × ) 945(4.5 × )        |
|              | Dirichlet (.3) | Dirichlet (.3) | Dirichlet (.3) | Dirichlet (.3)           | Dirichlet (.3)                 | Dirichlet (.3)                        |
|              | CIFAR-10       | 82.5 80.1      | 524 274        | 1998(3.8 × ) 652(2.4 × ) | 1000 + ( > 1.9 × ) 893(3.3 × ) | 1000 + ( > 1.9 × ) 1000 + ( > 3.6 × ) |
|              | CIFAR-100      | 52.0 47.3      | 503 234        | 1928(3.8 × ) 942(4.0 × ) | 1000 + ( > 2.0 × ) 871(3.7 × ) | 1000 + ( > 2.0 × ) 1000 + ( > 4.3 × ) |

Table 5: Number of parameters transmitted relative to one round of FedAvg to reach target test accuracy for 1% participation regime in the IID, non-IID settings. SCAFFOLD communicates the current model and its associated gradient per round, while others communicate only the current model. As such number of rounds for SCAFFOLD is one half of those reported.

| Participation   | Dataset        | Accuracy       | FedDyn         | SCAFFOLD       | FedAvg         | FedProx            |
|-----------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|--------------------|
| 1%              | IID            | IID            | IID            | IID            | IID            | IID                |
|                 | CIFAR-10       | 82.6           | 660            | 1544(2.3 × )   | 892(1.4 × )    | 1000 + ( > 1.5 × ) |
|                 |                | 81.6           | 543            | 1150(2.1 × )   | 603(1.1 × )    | 707(1.3 × )        |
|                 | CIFAR-100      | 39.8           | 409            | 1982(4.8 × )   | 428(1.0 × )    | 512(1.3 × )        |
|                 |                | 38.8           | 396            | 1862(4.7 × )   | 392(1.0 × )    | 454(1.1 × )        |
|                 | MNIST          | 98.3           | 529            | 956(1.8 × )    | 644(1.2 × )    | 451(0.9 × )        |
|                 |                | 97.3           | 145            | 290(2.0 × )    | 151(1.0 × )    | 143(1.0 × )        |
|                 |                | 94.9           | 483            | 1136(2.4 × )   | 826(1.7 × )    | 1000 + ( > 2.1 × ) |
|                 | EMNIST-L       | 93.9           | 210            | 554(2.6 × )    | 216(1.0 × )    | 238(1.1 × )        |
|                 |                | 43.0           | 170            | 460(2.7 × )    | 188(1.1 × )    | 151(0.9 × )        |
|                 | Shakespeare    | 42.0           | 148            | 342(2.3 × )    | 149(1.0 × )    | 142(1.0 × )        |
|                 | Dirichlet (.6) | Dirichlet (.6) | Dirichlet (.6) | Dirichlet (.6) | Dirichlet (.6) | Dirichlet (.6)     |
|                 | CIFAR-10       | 81.0           | 561            | 1510(2.7 × )   | 977(1.7 × )    | 841(1.5 × )        |
|                 |                | 80.0           | 436            | 1100(2.5 × )   | 673(1.5 × )    | 623(1.4 × )        |
|                 |                | 36.6           | 355            | 1996(5.6 × )   | 341(1.0 × )    | 352(1.0 × )        |
|                 | CIFAR-100      | 35.6           | 342            | 1876(5.5 × )   | 317(0.9 × )    | 342(1.0 × )        |
|                 |                | 98.2           | 486            | 1502(3.1 × )   | 863(1.8 × )    | 754(1.6 × )        |
|                 | MNIST          | 97.2           | 180            | 332(1.8 × )    | 199(1.1 × )    | 166(0.9 × )        |
|                 |                | 94.8           | 405            | 1230(3.0 × )   | 504(1.2 × )    | 1000 + ( > 2.5 × ) |
|                 | EMNIST-L       | 93.8           | 195            | 576(3.0 × )    | 256(1.3 × )    | 294(1.5 × )        |
|                 | Dirichlet (.3) | Dirichlet (.3) | Dirichlet (.3) | Dirichlet (.3) | Dirichlet (.3) | Dirichlet (.3)     |
|                 | CIFAR-10       | 79.0           | 590            | 1580(2.7 × )   | 955(1.6 × )    | 738(1.3 × )        |
|                 |                | 78.0           | 452            | 1272(2.8 × )   | 653(1.4 × )    | 497(1.1 × )        |
|                 | CIFAR-100      | 36.1           | 343            | 1990(5.8 × )   | 317(0.9 × )    | 342(1.0 × )        |
|                 |                | 35.1           | 321            | 1866(5.8 × )   | 294(0.9 × )    | 314(1.0 × )        |
|                 |                | 98.2           | 521            | 954(1.8 × )    | 951(1.8 × )    | 974(1.9 × )        |
|                 | MNIST          | 97.2           | 157            | 318(2.0 × )    | 169(1.1 × )    | 177(1.1 × )        |
|                 |                | 94.4           | 442            | 1860(4.2 × )   | 481(1.1 × )    | 1000 + ( > 2.3 × ) |
|                 | EMNIST-L       | 93.4           | 241            | 694(2.9 × )    | 286(1.2 × )    | 279(1.2 × )        |
|                 | Non-IID        | Non-IID        | Non-IID        | Non-IID        | Non-IID        | Non-IID            |
|                 | Shakespeare    | 43.8           | 158            | 388(2.5 × )    | 159(1.0 × )    | 153(1.0 × )        |
|                 |                | 42.8           | 143            | 318(2.2 × )    | 146(1.0 × )    | 145(1.0 × )        |

Figure 3: MNIST- Histogram of device counts whose 40% (3a), 60% (3b), and 80% (3c) datapoints belong to k classes.

<!-- image -->

Table 6: Number of parameters transmitted relative to one round of FedAvg to reach target test accuracy for convex synthetic problem in different types of heterogeneity settings. SCAFFOLD communicates the current model and its associated gradient per round, while others communicate only the current model. As such number of rounds for SCAFFOLD is one half of those reported.

| Loss                 | FedDyn               | SCAFFOLD             | FedAvg               | FedProx              |
|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|
| Homogeneous          | Homogeneous          | Homogeneous          | Homogeneous          | Homogeneous          |
| 0.0603               | 32                   | 70(2.2 × )           | 136(4.2 × )          | 49(1.5 × )           |
| Type 1 Heterogeneous | Type 1 Heterogeneous | Type 1 Heterogeneous | Type 1 Heterogeneous | Type 1 Heterogeneous |
| 1.5717               | 17                   | 88(5.2 × )           | 20(1.2 × )           | 18(1.1 × )           |
| Type 2 Heterogeneous | Type 2 Heterogeneous | Type 2 Heterogeneous | Type 2 Heterogeneous | Type 2 Heterogeneous |
| 0.1205               | 150                  | 164(1.1 × )          | 274(1.8 × )          | 275(1.8 × )          |
| Type 3 Heterogeneous | Type 3 Heterogeneous | Type 3 Heterogeneous | Type 3 Heterogeneous | Type 3 Heterogeneous |
| 0.0854               | 34                   | 260(7.6 × )          | 79(2.3 × )           | 106(3.1 × )          |

Figure 4: CIFAR-10- Convergence curves for different 100 and 1000 devices in the IID and Dirichlet (.3) settings with 10% participation level and balanced data.

<!-- image -->

Figure 5: CIFAR-100- Convergence curves for different 100 and 500 devices in the IID and Dirichlet (.3) settings with 10% participation level and balanced data.

<!-- image -->

Figure 6: CIFAR-10- Convergence curves for participation fractions ranging from 100% to 10% to 1% in the IID, Dirichlet (.6) and Dirichlet (.3) settings with 100 devices and balanced data.

<!-- image -->

Figure 7: CIFAR-100- Convergence curves for participation fractions ranging from 100% to 10% to 1% in the IID, Dirichlet (.6) and Dirichlet (.3) settings with 100 devices and balanced data.

<!-- image -->

Figure 8: MNIST- Convergence curves for participation fractions ranging from 100% to 10% to 1% in the IID, Dirichlet (.6) and Dirichlet (.3) settings with 100 devices and balanced data.

<!-- image -->

Figure 9: EMNIST-L- Convergence curves for participation fractions ranging from 100% to 10% to 1% in the IID, Dirichlet (.6) and Dirichlet (.3) settings with 100 devices and balanced data.

<!-- image -->